---
layout: post
title: idle clickers and the meta
permalink: /posts/2021-05-1-idle-clickers/
---

Here's a post that has nothing to do with my previous posts and arguably nothing
to do with the premise of this blog.

I've been playing a lot of idle clickers lately and it made me reflect on life.

---

It's been a while since I last posted here. I've got a lot of ideas for posts,
but little motivation. So I thought I'd write out my worst idea for a post - an
over thought piece about idle clickers and some not at all profound epiphanies I
had about life.

I've been playing idle clickers for a while. I don't know what the first idle
clicker I played was. But I've definitely played through the classics like
`Candy Box!`, `cookie clicker`, `tangerine tycoon`, and even some more obscure
ones like `idle reactor` (no, I have not and will not play `afk arena` - just
because of their aggresive marketing). If you're unfamiliar with the genre, idle
clickers or idle games are games that you play by mostly not playing them. The
game starts out simple - you perform some repetitive task like clicking on a
cookie to produce another cookie. Once you have enough cookies you can sell them
to buy an oven, which will produce cookies at some fixed rate. Once you unlock
the oven, the game will reveal something else, like an oven factory which will
produce ovens at some fixed rate. The game continues to scale until it becomes
absolutely ridiculous, like you have multiple dimensions entrapped in your
cookie making scheme (this is my summary of what I remember about cookie
clicker. I also vaguely remember something about an army of grandmas. It's a fun
time). Along the way you have upgrades to make each "level" of production
faster, or to automatically purchase upgrades or items on each level so that you
can automate the gameplay, and just come back to it every so often to make
higher level purchases. If this sounds repetitive to you - it is. Bad idle
clickers feel like a chore and each "level" of gameplay is nearly identical to
the last, modulo some exponential increase in how long it takes to get to that
level. Unfortunately most idle games are pretty formulaic, with only a few that
throw some really interesting mechanics into the equation.

The part that makes idle clickers interesting is the exponential progression.
It's only fun because you know what you've automated away, but you can still see
the lowest level details to put your latest upgrades into perspective. What's
interesting to me is that we see this structure in a lot of things around us.
Take typing for instance. At some point in our lives we touched a keyboard for
the first time. And when we did, we probably struggled to type, hunting and
pecking or maybe just struggling through some basic words at abysmal WPMs. But
it was still exciting, with the push of a button, we create characters on
machines. As time goes on we become better at typing. We develop an intuitive
understanding of how keyboards work. Maybe we learn some technique - where do
your hands go? Typing starts becoming more about the content than the process.
We automate the process of picking out individual characters, and start
developing muscle memory. Even if you're not a touch typist, you can probably
still type a few words or phrases just from muscle memory. If you're really into
typing or type a lot for your profession or hobbies, you might even get into the
meta aspects of typing, like custom keyboards, custom key layouts, macros, etc.
At some point we're far removed from the process of hunting and pecking but at
it's core we've just refined our initial behavior. We're still pressing a
button. And every now and then we're reminded of that when we make typos, or
focus hard on the motion of our hands because we're writing about the process of
typing itself (too meta?).

Another example I can think of is software engineering (I'm sure you already
guessed my profession from the URL anyway right?). I can remember the first few
programs I wrote and how writing code was all about the process of looking up
syntax and trying to understand what combination of arcane words would make the
computer do what I wanted it to. Eventually, I got good enough at that to where
writing programs was more about understanding the behavior I was trying to
implement than the basic elements of code. After years of formal education, it
began to shift towards understanding how to design components of software. As I
develop professionally it's started to incorporate elements of designing
systems, and I'm sure eventually it'll progress on to designing solutions
comprised of systems, and maybe even designing ecosystems of solutions and
building communitites to support ecosystems. The point is, the level of
abstraction has increased but the basic building block has remained the same. To
progress, I've begun to "play the meta" as gamers say.

So why is this important? It probably isn't. But I think there's some
interesting things to note. Just like clickers, getting exponentially better at
something means that the next level is also exponentially farther away. Our
perception of time linearizes things, so our scale is logarithmic - it doesn't
feel like we got exponentially better at something, it just feels like the next
step. Sometimes it can be hard to find the element that's the point of genesis
to really reflect on the progress you've made, but finding it brings your
accomplishments into a new perspective. It also helps you grow - its okay for
your next goal to be exponentially harder than your last, that's just how things
have been up to the present anyway. The opposite is also true, if you feel like
the next step is exponentially harder and that scares you, just remember that
you've already grown exponentially and in time you will again.
