---
layout: post
title: musing on music - Porter Robinson's secret sky set
permalink: /posts/2021-04-10-musing-on-music/
---

I've been listening to this set a lot lately and thought about what made it
stand out to me.

---

## a foreword

Since this is my first post in what I intend to be a series, I wanted to write a
bit about how this post came to be. If you don't want to know, I understand.
Feel free to skip ahead.

Styles of music comes with a lot of associated images and ideas. Some kinds of
music push for revering _virtuosos_, others are more about constructing a
specific atmosphere or experience for the listener. As a result, there's
different kinds of people who gravitate towards various genres, not just in
pursuit of what sounds good to them, but also to find communities where they
feel like they belong. Personally, I like a lot of different kinds of music.
I've found myself floating between all kinds of genres for various reasons, be
it to fit in to particular social circles or strengthen certain relationships,
or simply because I like the way something sounds. As a result I spent some time
thinking about what I should write my first post in this series about. What kind
of image do I want associated with the persona I'm constructing under this name?
What kind of readers do I want to attract? I don't think I found an answer to
those questions, because I realized those questions are irrelevant to the
intentions of this series. I want to write about how music has shaped my life
and perspective, and that covers a very broad range of who I am as a person. I
will be writing about music that perfectly aligns with the persona I want people
to percieve, but I will also write about music that falls into my `guilty
pleasure` category. I may even write about music I *don't* like, because that
too reveals something about who I am. So yes, my first post is about an EDM
livestream by Porter Robinson. I don't think I would say that EDM is my favorite
genre, or that I really fit into the EDM lifestyle, but labels like _genre_, are
irrelevant to the intention of this post. I hope you enjoy this content.

If you read all of this foreword - thank you.

## the main post

For some background, secret sky was a virtual music festival featuring Porter
Robinson as the headlining artist. It was livestreamed via youtube on May 9th,
2020 (during the covid-19 pandemic for future readers' reference). I did watch
a portion of the festival while it was live and it was one of the most memorable
moments of the pandemic for me so far. Lately I've been revisiting Porter's set
and I began to wonder why I was so into it. I think I've managed to distill it
down to three elements:

+ Community
+ Pacing
+ `~~vibes~~`

### Community

There was a time when I discovered music almost exclusively through youtube.
I owe youtube for introducing me to all kinds of artists and styles of music and
for the hours of fun I had going down rabbit holes of related videos and
community created playlists back in the day. In recent years I've moved off of
youtube for my music related needs, and I mostly use spotify, or occasionally
bandcamp. A big source of appeal for those platforms for me is that by listening
to music there, I am supporting and funding artists I like. Secret sky has
helped reintroduce me to the world of music on youtube and made me rethink what
a good music listening experience means in more ways than one.

Almost as important as youtube's mysterious algorithm and addictive interface is
it's comment section. By interacting with strangers who were somehow drawn to
the same things you were, you start to feel like you're a part of something
bigger. You start percieving a community.

Community is an important aspect of feeling connected to anything. We see that
in all kinds of hobbies and subcultures in the world. We see it in the emergance
of more and more discords for various niches as people seek to connect and
experience the joy of doing what they love with others. To build a community,
you need some space for the community to interact. Through secret sky, a new
space has been created for a community to gather around. The basis for this
community is some combination of those who experienced the festival and those
who came later just for the music. Participating in this community (in any form,
be it leaving a comment, browsing through comments, or just talking to others in
real life about it) adds a sense of depth to the experience of watching the
performance.

This is true for a lot of performances in many festivals, but I really like it
when artists play covers or remixes of song made by other artists performing at
that event. In this case, hearing `Madeon` and `Anamanaguchi`'s camoes in the
set right after having seen them "live" earlier was a nice touch. In someways I
think it was especially important in this festival, given it's virtual nature.
I've been to a few other virtual festivals last year, and this was the only one
that made me feel like I was actually not alone while watching it.

### Pacing

This one is more about the set itself. I feel like the choice of tracks told a
sort of story. It explored a wide range of themes and emotions. Moments of
intense joy followed by more mellow sections exploring more painful emotions,
concluded by hopeful tracks that felt like a cathartic conclusion. There are a
lot of DJs out that don't bother constructing this kind of flow in their sets,
instead opting to emphasize certain rhythms or sonic themes - which makes for
great sets, but rarely memorable ones. The sense of emotional journey in
Porter's secret sky set gives it a sense of character that keeps bringing me
back. This leads me neatly in to my next point:

###  `~~vibes~~`

While the pacing of each section was important, the emotional content of each
section is possibly more important.  I've been going through a rough time
lately. Music has been a really powerful interface for me to connect with myself
without being overwhelemed. This set has touched me in a way I didn't expect.
I've connected with virtually every track in someway and realized something new
about what I'm feeling and experiencing in this moment.

Some tracks in the set are full of intense positivity, like `Lil B`'s `I love
you`. While others acknowledge darker emotions but without giving those emotions
control, such as `I don't think I can do this again` by `Clairo and Mura Masa`,
and `Feel the same` by `Salute`. But there's also tracks that embrace the
bittersweet feeling of hope that's so integral to Porter's style (such as `get
your wish` and `sad machine`).

Porter's original music often has lyrics that convey much more complex emotions
than the upbeat tempo conveys. For example, the line `don't say you lose, just
yet - get up and move ahead and not only for your self` from `get your wish`
speaks to me on a personal level. It's very easy for me to get in my head and
lose sight for the fact that I what I really want out of life is to impact
others - not just just myself.

## conclusion

While listening, I found myself thinking a lot about who I was when I was
younger. Times were simpler, and it was easier to find answers to questions, but
does that really justify the disparity between who I was and who I am? Is it
possible that the experiences of comfort and peace that I held as a kid are
still within my grasp? Have I made choices that result in the uncertainty and
anxiety I feel as an adult? Watching this set has helped me reconnect with the
hopes and dreams I had as a kid and it's helped me appreciate how far I've come
and come closer to understanding where I need to go.

## afterword

Thanks for reading this far. I've been writing for a while - but this is the
first project where I'm pushing myself to write about who I am. I can now
appreciate that it's not as easy as I thought to put my own emotions to paper. I
think this post is a good start, but I think there's a long way to go before I
can say that my content conveys what I wanted it to. I hope you are looking
forward to my next post.
